---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true
url: /engineering-education/machine-teaching-to-improve-ai/
title: Transfer Learning for Deep Learning
description: This article will be going over
author: collins-ayuya
date: 2020-11-17T00:00:00-19:00
topics: []
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/machine-teaching-to-improve-ai/hero.jpg
    alt:  image
---
We provide machine learning models with volumes of data with the expectation that they shall identify patterns or learn relationships in the data. This can be an expensive and time-consuming process.
<!--more-->
However, there exists an approach that leverages human abilities and expertise to guide machine learning models to find solutions to problems much faster. This is called machine teaching. We explore this approach in this article.

### Table of Contents

1. Machine teaching

2. Machine teaching vs machine learning

3. Benefits of machine teaching

4. Applications of machine teaching

### Prerequisites

You are only required to be familiar with basic machine learning concepts. Here’s a link to an article that offers an introduction to [machine learning](/engineering-education/supervised-learning-algorithms/).

### Machine Teaching

Research around the field of machine learning today takes a technocentric approach. This approach is centered around technology and promotes its importance. It addresses technical and functional goals often at the expense of human values and ethics. As a result, this perspective may lead to some level of disconnection between the growth of artificial intelligence as a field and the users of the technology.

To curb such disconnection, an alternative approach is emerging. This approach is placing the focus on domain experts and end-users as opposed to machine learning experts. The approach is referred to as machine teaching. The concept of machine teaching looks to obtain knowledge from people as opposed to data as the sole source. The idea behind machine teaching is adamant that any information processing skill that can be taught to a human can be easily taught to a machine. To develop solutions to problems, machine teaching uses human expertise and human abilities to assist machine learning models in identifying crucial clues on how to generate a solution faster.

A human being, who happens to be a domain expert, acts as a teacher to a machine-based learner. An important result of this is that domain knowledge is instilled into the resulting machine learning system. Machine teaching is responsible for providing optimal training data for driving the learning algorithm towards the desired output.

### How it Works

Machine teaching combines the expertise of human domain experts with machine learning to automate the generation of management of machine learning algorithms. A goal of machine teaching is to reduce manual intervention in the learning process. The teacher has a central role in this process:

1. The teacher ensures an effective model is generated by improving the process of transferring knowledge to the learning algorithm.

2. The teacher is actively involved in the collection and labeling of data. They ensure an optimal dataset is collected by filtering data based on domain expertise or intuition. They decide which dataset is best to use to carry out a given task.

Let’s go through the machine teaching process. It has three stages; building, training, and deployment.

1. Building stage. This stage involves the creation of the machine teaching program. The program is then connected to a training simulator that happens to be domain-specific. The role of these simulators is the generation of adequate training data. The training data generated by simulated environments cover various use cases. These simulations mimic real-world conditions and scenarios to effectively train the model.

2. Training stage. A training engine handles this phase. It automates the generation as well as training of machine learning models. These models are combined with neural networks and models containing domain-specific expertise. The latter is a result of the building stage.

3. Deployment stage. Trained models are then deployed to their desired use cases.

### Machine Teaching vs Machine Learning

To understand machine teaching better, it is crucial to distinguish it from traditional machine learning.

#### Approach

Traditional machine learning takes a learner-centered approach. What this means is that the focus is on a machine-based learner to identify relationships, generate insights, and make predictions from vast amounts of data. This implies that the key source of knowledge for traditional machine learning models is sizeable amounts of data.

But, when it comes to machine teaching, the perspective is shifted to focus on the “teacher”. The teacher in this case is a human who possesses expertise in a given domain. The teacher leverages their experience, abilities, and domain expertise to train machine learning models. The involvement of the human element as the teacher allows for breaking down and decomposing of useful concepts to assist machine learning models to be efficiently trained.

#### Requirements

Traditional machine learning often involves the use of lots of labeled data to train a machine learning model. It also requires expertise in the form of data science or machine learning experts for each task. The availability of both is limited therefore the opportunity to build models is available only to those with the aforementioned expertise.

Machine teaching on the other hand operates a bit differently. Since the focus is on imparting domain knowledge into machine learning models to drive their learning, it means that a wide range of knowledge is available to help train the model. The machine teaching process does not need one to be a data scientist or for one to have a large labeled data set to build effective machine learning models.

#### Duration of Training

As we mentioned before, traditional machine learning involves the use of a lot of labeled data to train a model. The learner-centered approach means that the model is exposed to a lot of data and it is up to the model to identify patterns and relationships in data. This approach may not be the most effective one since the datasets in use may not be optimal for the training of the model. There might be data that is of little value to the training of the model which ends up unnecessarily prolonging the training time of the model.

With machine teaching, the training process might be more efficient since the model is given an optimal dataset to learn from. The model is given hints and clues on where to look for relationships in data. Compare this with a scenario where a model is given a very broad or general dataset. This model is expected to identify patterns in data without any clues or guides. The model in this context would end up taking longer to train in comparison with one that already knows where to look and what to look for in data. In comparison to traditional machine learning, the time taken to build a model can be much shorter via machine teaching.

### Benefits of Machine Teaching

#### Democratization of Knowledge

Machine learning development has been in the hands of machine learning experts for far too long. It would previously be very difficult for anyone who is not a data scientist or machine learning expert to build a model.

Machine teaching gives non-machine learning experts the tools to not only build machine learning models but also teach the models to perform better. Machine learning technology is made simpler for anyone to use. The know-how of how to develop and use machine learning models is thus opened up to non-machine learning experts.

#### Bespoke Models

Machine learning models are used to solve many problems in many domains. They are trusted and believed to have the capability to impressively solve a wide range of problems. Though, the scope of machine learning implementation is unlimited. For instance, machine learning can be implemented in the medical sector. It can be impactful in the transport sector. There are use cases in finance. Agriculture is benefitting from machine learning technologies as well. This would mean that those developing the models would need to have domain knowledge of a wide range of sectors where models need to be implemented. However, machine learning experts may have domain knowledge but may not necessarily be domain experts. Which may lead to useful but not the most effective models.

No one understands a given domain better than a domain expert. Machine teaching allows domain experts to be involved in the machine learning process. This facilitates the development of custom-made models. These experts can offer perspectives, methods, and insights that would otherwise be missed by a data scientist with general domain knowledge. The models developed as a result feel like they are tailor-made to completely solve a given problem.

#### Innovation

As we have mentioned, the knowledge that was previously mostly concentrated around machine learning experts is democratized with machine teaching. We have also mentioned that machine teaching encourages the development of custom models more than ever before. A result of these two factors is greater innovation. Non-machine learning experts greatly benefit from the machine teaching approach. Creativity is subjective. Since creativity and innovation cannot be monopolized, statistically, the more the people (outside of machine learning practitioners) who can develop machine learning solutions, the greater the opportunity for innovation.

Putting this power in the hands of people with different perspectives, skills, and approaches to solving problems allows them to be as creative and diverse as possible in developing solutions. Non-machine learning experts are given the power to find and explore novel use cases for machine learning. Domain expertise of such people as well contributes to innovation since a domain expert is someone who knows the ins and outs of a particular domain. They know the pain points, what can be optimized, and where solutions are needed most. Therefore, such a person is the most suitable to develop a machine learning solution for their particular domain of expertise.

#### Accessible Machine Learning

A key benefit of machine teaching is that it is making machine learning accessible to as many people as possible. We can argue that the greatest barrier to entry to machine learning development is the need to have machine learning expertise. Circumventing this barrier thanks to the democratization of knowledge and development of machine teaching tools opens up the field of machine learning to millions of people. People with little to no machine learning skills can be involved in developing machine learning solutions.

#### Automation of Model Building and Management

The automation of models is valuable in an enterprise setting. Consider a scenario where an enterprise uses a traditional machine learning approach to automate insurance assessments. Firstly, such a solution would have to be developed by a machine learning expert. Two, the labeling of data in the form of insurance documents, for example, would involve using a lot of people for correct labeling. For maintenance and tweaking of the system, the enterprise would have to outsource to an expert. But, with a machine teaching approach, a person within the enterprise would identify the definitive features in insurance assessment documents. The person’s expertise would then be translated into a machine learning model that is to carry out the insurance assessments. The model would learn how to carry out said assessments. It would also learn to deal with new scenarios that would previously require the involvement of an expert. We shall explore an industrial example of such later on. The company would save a lot of time and money through machine teaching.

### Applications of Machine Teaching

Machine teaching uses data and human domain knowledge to carry out desired tasks. This allows machine teaching to be useful in automating many tasks that would require the intervention of an expert. Below are a few examples. These examples are represented as [demos]( https://aidemos.microsoft.com/machineteaching) by Microsoft. Check them out for a better understanding.

#### Machine Calibration

Computer numerical control (CNC) is a technique that is used to automate the control of machine tools like drills and boring tools. It is done via software that is embedded in a microcomputer that is attached to a tool. Spinning tools are used to cut metal as well as plastic parts. However, during cutting, the friction between the machine and the target leads to a reduction in precision. An expert operator of the machine has to routinely go to the machine physically to recalibrate it until it is precise again. With machine teaching, a model may be trained using the machine operator’s expertise to automatically calibrate and recalibrate the CNC machines. The model may end up being more accurate than a human operator. This makes the process faster and more accurate compared to having physical human intervention.

#### Smart Buildings

Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems in buildings consume a lot of energy, often ineffectively. They also struggle to maintain safe CO2 levels. This may cause occupants to experience a range of discomfort.

Consider the have HVAC system of a smart building. To save energy, effectively manage the levels of CO2, and keep the tenants safe and comfortable, an expert may train a model to achieve this. A model may be taught to supply heat when the ever-varying energy cost is cheapest. The model may learn the optimum time of day to freshen the air and vary the temperature in the building. The quality of life in such a building is improved.

#### Motion Control

Motion control is used to automate a wide range of machines in an industrial or manufacturing setting. Such automation can be applied to drills of oil rigs. Oftentimes, you would find an operator manipulating the drill using a joystick or tablet device. This to avoid obstacles and keep the drill on course as it goes further underground. Instead of always depending on a human being to oversee this process, a model can be trained to follow a predetermined drilling plan and control the drill. Thanks to the expertise imparted by a human expert, a model can drill faster by figuring out the optimal path of drilling. This ends up being a faster and more accurate process that spares humans of the tedium and high pressure of such tasks. Such an approach is applicable in other industries such as mining, automotive, and discrete manufacturing.

### It’s a Wrap

Machine teaching adds value to the machine learning process. It is a paradigm that makes AI more accessible to more people as domain experts are involved in the model building process. This allows for the creation of better, more efficient models. Taking from the idea of machine teaching, and considering the evolution of AI and technology as a whole, more approaches that focus on involving more non-experts in the creation and implementation of technology are welcome.

### References and Further Reading

1. [Machine Teaching A New Paradigm for Building Machine Learning Systems](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.06742.pdf)

2. L. Holmberg, P. Davidsson, C. M. Olsson, and P. Linde, "[Contextual machine teaching](https://doi.org/10.1109/PerComWorkshops48775.2020.9156132)," 2020 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), Austin, TX, USA, 2020, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/PerComWorkshops48775.2020.9156132.

3. L. Holmberg, P. Davidsson and P. Linde, "[A Feature Space Focus in Machine Teaching](https://doi.org/10.1109/PerComWorkshops48775.2020.9156175)," 2020 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), Austin, TX, USA, 2020, pp. 1-2, doi: 10.1109/PerComWorkshops48775.2020.9156175.

4. [Machine Teaching](https://blogs.microsoft.com/ai/machine-teaching/)

5. [Machine teaching: the next extension of machine learning](https://www.intheblack.com/articles/2019/10/01/machine-teaching-is-the-next-generation-of-machine-learning)

6. [Machine Learning Vs Machine Teaching: A Whole New Approach To Imparting Human Skills](https://analyticsindiamag.com/machine-learning-vs-machine-teaching-a-whole-new-approach-to-imparting-human-skills/)

7. [Machine Teaching](https://searchenterpriseai.techtarget.com/definition/machine-teaching)
