### Introduction

With the pace that technology is growing in recent years, it is easy to get lost in the rumpus of technology terms popping up every day. From Internet of Things (IoT), blockchain, 5G, robotics, data science, Artificial Intelligence (AI), among others, the possibilities made available by these technological advancements keep widening. Among these emergent technologies rising in popularity is machine learning and deep learning. In recent years, these two have been attracting the attention of many.

While they are different concepts, it is difficult to talk about machine learning and deep learning without mentioning artificial intelligence, which is another technological innovation that has been garnering a lot of attention for several years. In order to better understand the relationship between these three concepts, it helps to think of them as subsets of each other. Deep learning is a subset of machine learning while machine learning, on the other hand, is a subset of artificial intelligence.

### Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence

AI in general attempts to mimic the functioning of the human brain in the decision-making process by having a set of algorithms that have the ability to handle unanticipated situations by themselves. So, if AI and machine learning are a set of algorithms, what then sets them apart? The main difference is the data served as the input. In machine learning, the machine is fed structured data and, like the name suggests, it observes patterns and learns from the data – enabling it to make predictions in the future based on what it learnt from the data fed into it. That is to say, machine learning as a type of AI allows a computer to be more agile in that algorithms it uses do not have to be explicitly programmed because as the computer is exposed to new data, it learns, grows and develops the algorithms by itself, much like how the human brain learns. AI, on the other hand, can be fed with unstructured data and still be able to function. However, the terms AI and machine learning are often used interchangeably, sometimes just because people cannot tell the difference, and sometimes because it is not always possible to tell whether the underlying data is structured or unstructured.

### Deep Learning

An even closer, more sophisticated resemblance of the functioning of the human brain is in deep learning, which is a subset of machine learning inspired by the human brain structure. In deep learning, the algorithms use complex neural networks with many layers resembling the neural connections that are found in the human brain. Algorithms created function similarly to those in machine learning, but each of the layers has a different interpretation of the data. The neural networks also learn from the data they are fed. The neurons in the network are then able to decide which features are optimal for performing a specific task or for classifying data. After many iterations of the learning process, which also includes learning from their mistakes, the accuracy of the deep learning model increases. Deep learning is therefore a more complex and more capable version of machine learning.

### Machine Learning vs Deep Learning

Deep learning differs from machine learning in that it learns from its mistakes independently without human intervention while for machine learning, there is a need for a human to correct the mistake if one is made. The algorithm then learns not to make that mistake again in the future. The multi-level neural networks can learn from their mistakes but even then, they can be wrong depending on the quality of the data fed to them. Needless to mention, the accuracy of the outcomes is significantly dependent on the quality of data used to learn.

### Applications and Conclusion

Deep learning has already been applied in many companies mostly in the tech industry to technologies we often interact with, sometimes without even realizing. Most of Google's applications such as Gmail, Google Search and Google Maps use deep learning to improve their intuitiveness. Gmail is able to categorize important mail for the user depending on their use, and Smart Reply which offers a choice for responding to emails with a simple email depending on the content of the email received. Google Search can anticipate what you are trying to search based on your past search activity, and Google Maps also can anticipate places you are searching for immediately you start typing your query depending on your past location data. Machine learning is therefore an integral part of the smooth and seamless user experience we are used to in most applications, including customized user experience which learns from your behavioral profile and anticipates what you might be interested in. There is not telling how much closer we can get to replicate the manner of thinking exhibited by the human brain in the future, but the reality is that each day we are advancing that line and at an accelerating pace.